How are you doing? It's been such a, it's been a long time. It's, it's been a while.
Yeah, it's been a while. Yeah, I'm, I'm, I'm continuing to improve. It's, you know, this,
I, the long COVID really did a number on me. So I'm still, still recovering. It's been years,
but I'm still recovering. But a couple of doctors contacted me from Australia and said that they,
they thought from my symptoms, they heard me on a podcast and they said they thought from my symptoms
that the heart wasn't the primary thing that had been attacked, but it was my gut that the,
the, the viruses of bacterophage and that it destroyed the, the bacteria that produce GABA
and serotonin and other calming kinds of things and, and promoted bacteria that produce amines
that sort of overdrive the heart and lead to the failure that I had. And so that's, so they put me
on this really strict diet, vegetables and, and no, basically almost no guys, almost like a total
no carb kind of diet. Has that, have you seen an impact?
Yeah, it's completely changed my gut. And I actually, it's making a huge difference. So,
so this is, I mean, the virus attacks you wherever I guess you're weak. And it got me on the gut
in the heart. I'm glad you're doing better though. It's, it's always great to know someone's doing
better. And I mean, we need you out there to continue doing such great work. Well, thank you.
And then we need you to continue to do this great podcast. And, and of course, the medical work that
you do. Thanks so much, Don. I mean, we've covered so much. We've chatted twice already. And both,
both times we went through various different aspects of all your work. And the first podcast,
we spoke about user interface theory of perception. We spoke about conscious realism.
We touched on conscious agents, but in the second one, we went very in depth,
conscious agents in the subatomic world. We went into that paper, we dissected people,
loved it by the way. Yeah, and it's been, it's, it's been quite a hit. For this podcast, I thought,
let me curate a bunch of questions from the audience so far from the first two. And we're
trying to each of them. But before we do that, I think since conscious agents of the subatomic
world, what's happened since, because I'm assuming you guys are having a lot of fun. And
it's always exciting to when someone jumps and gets outside the box to know what's,
what's really outside the box. That's right. So we have made a couple,
for me, very fun discoveries. So one has to do with the notion of observation.
What does it mean to observe? What will it mean in our theory to, for one system to observe
another? In, you know, classical physics, the observer is not much mentioned. And if they're
mentioned at all, they're assumed to be objective and don't really interfere at all with whatever
it is that they're, so they, they don't disturb whatever they're observing. In quantum mechanics,
there isn't a theory of the observer, but, but it's known that, you know, somehow the measurement
process is a destructive process. I mean, things are different when you measure than, you know,
when you don't. And so there's this feeling that, you know, the observer has to play a role, but
it's not formalized, right? The, the measurement is formalized, you know, it's some kind of,
there is a formalization there in terms of positive operator value measures and so POVMs
and so forth. But, but, you know, even someone like Chris Fuchs, who's saying, you know, that,
that quantum mechanics is really just a description for the agent, how it should update, update their
beliefs in, in, in light of experimental data and so forth. But when you ask him, so, so what is your
theory of the agent, he says, I don't know you a theory of the agent, I'm just telling you that
quantum mechanics is the manual that the agent should use. And I don't know what an agent is.
And I respect, I mean, you can't do everything. And he's doing quantum mechanics, and he's not
doing the agent, he's not doing the observer. But he does say that the agent's important.
So, so then in our theory, then, you know, the question comes front and center, because we're
talking about conscious agents all the way down. So we can't avoid. So when we talk about a measurement,
we have to actually have a theory of what does it mean for one system of conscious agents
to make a measurement on another system of conscious agents, right? What does that mean?
And we use, so I have to be a little technical to, to explain the idea, but I'll try to be as
un-technical as possible. But we use Markovian kernels. So a Markovian kernel basically says,
suppose you have a system that, that can see three colors, red, green, and blue. Now that's,
that's what it experiences. There's a kernel that we call the qualia kernel that describes
the sequence of color experiences that this observer might have. So maybe if I see red now,
the probability is that the next time I see a color, it'll be green, but maybe it's,
maybe it's half. And it's also a third that I'll see blue, but it's also, you know, whatever is
left over, probably that I'll see red. So I can say for, for each color I'm now experiencing,
what is the probability of the next color I might experience? And you can, so when you write down a
matrix, a table of all those probabilities, in mathematics, we call that a Markov kernel.
And it's actually a linear operator. And, and you can actually study the properties of a linear
operator. It can rotate vectors, it can exchange, you expand and contract vectors, it can do all
sorts of things. So, so that's the, one of the models we're using to represent observers and the
conscious experiences that what they have. What we discovered was, and this is a new
contribution to Markov chain theory, apparently, to the mathematics of it, is that,
well, first, first, what I'm about to say is not a new contribution, it's a standard notion,
but we're going to use it for the, for the new contribution. If you take one Markov chain,
like it has three colors, and you've got the Markov chain on it, but then you say, what if I,
you know, don't look at the red, I don't care when the red, I'm only going to look at the green and
blue. And I'm going to look at those two colors. What Markov chain gets induced on those two colors
from the bigger Markov chain and red, green and blue, right? There's some probability
of going from red, green, blue. But what happens if I only can see the green and the blue,
I'll get some chance, you know, if I'm, if I see green now that I'll see blue next,
for see green now, I'll see green next. So, so I can actually, you can intuitively, you can say,
well, yeah, you should be able to induce a Markov chain on the smaller number of states, right?
But it would somehow respect the bigger, the bigger Markov chain, right? So that's the idea
of a trace, it's called a trace chain. Well, what we proved, this is work with Chaitan Prakash,
so he and I worked on this together. And what we found is that the relationship of being a trace
chain to another Markov chain is a partial order. That means that we found a, this is an entire
logic on the space of all Markov chains, all Markov kernels. So this is a brand new logic.
One, one in one chain entails another, if it's a trace chain of the other. That's, that's,
so I can, the actual definition is simple. Once I've told, I can actually say the depth. So one
Markov chain P is less than or equal to Markov chain Q, if and only if P is a trace chain of Q.
And you can prove that that is actually a partial order. And it's a logic. So it's actually a logic
on the space of all Markov chains. It's not Boolean. It's more general than Boolean. It's more
general than quantum logics, ortho complimented lattices. This is more, it's more general than
that. It's locally Boolean. So every particular Markov kernel, if you look at all the ones that
are less than it, all the ones that, that are less than it, they form a Boolean logic. So this
is a locally Boolean logic of observation. And then we proved that this, if you take,
so by the way, then this is our notion of observation. If one observers
kernel or Markov chain is less than or equal to another, then it observes the bigger chain. So
that's, so that's how that's what, so notice our notion of observation is not this objective,
you're outside the system. No, no, you're immersed in it. You are part of the system.
You're an integral part of the system that you're observing. So, so at the top level,
that's the take home from this. Our theory of observation is the observer is no scientist
that's separate from everything and not involved in anything and completely separate and can't,
and can be ignored. No, no, no, no, you are intimately part of the system. And you must be
understood to get a real theory of observation in science. You have to understand what an agent is
and how it's embedded in the systems that it's observing. And this is, this gives a mathematical
logic for doing that. So it's really, we're pretty excited. But, but then each Markov chain,
if you have Markov chains that are like recurrent communicating class, so they're in some sense,
they're nice, they're nice Markov chains. I'll just use the word nice as a non technical term,
but I gave you the technical for those who want the technical recurrent communicating one current
communicating class. They have been a probability measure that tells you long term, what are the
probabilities of the different states that you'll see like, what was the probability of seeing red,
maybe long term, you see red a third of the time, blue two thirds of the time and green,
you don't see hardly at all. Maybe, maybe that's the long term problem. That's called the stationary
measure of the Markov chain. And so it turns out that when you have a big measure and then a trace,
sorry, a big chain in a trace chain, that the stationary measure of the trace chain is exactly
the restriction of those of the stationary measure of the bigger chain to that subset of states.
In other words, it's all compatible. So you have a big measure for the stationary measure of the
big guy, and maybe three of the states are what you trace on. Well, if you look at the big guy's
probability measure on those three states, that's exactly what you get on the little guy, just
renormalize so that it's a probability measure, you have to renormalize it so it's probability.
So all of these stationary measures are, they follow through this logic. And so it turns out,
this then means that there's this logic that we discovered on probability measures
that I published 30 years ago. And it's, I published it with Bruce Bennett, who's a,
he's now dead, but a brilliant mathematician, and Parish Murthy, who's a graduate student
of mathematics. So it's two mathematicians and a flunky me working on this. And what we published
it in the Journal of Math Psych, and what we, what we proved is that there was a logic on
probability measures where one probability measure implies another or entails another
probability measure, if and only if it's a normalized restriction. So I get the bigger
probability measure, I take a subset of its states, renormalize the probability on that,
and that's the probability of this guy down here. It turns out that's, so it's a simple idea. You
know, I'm just a normalized restriction of the bigger measure, but then that's the implication
that gives you a non Boolean logic. That's, there's no global compliment, just like in,
by the way, this trace logic, there's no global compliment. Okay. Locally, there is,
because you have a local Boolean logic, but globally not. So it turns out, this last thing
I'm about to say, we haven't proven it, but we're going to try to do that. There's a homomorphism
of the logics, that the trace logic is essentially homomorphic to the what we call the Lebesgue
logic, probability measures. So this gives us the trace logic gives us a formal theory of
observation. And the Lebesgue logic of probability measures gives us a formal mere theory of
probabilistic belief. And so putting them together with this homomorphism shows how
observations are formally related to probabilistic beliefs. Okay. So this is for us,
a major breakthrough in terms of the formalism. And we had to go after this because you mentioned
our paper on the subatomic world, you know, so conscious agents in the subatomic world. Well,
we have to say what we mean when we're talking about modeling observations of quarks and gluons
inside the proton. What do we mean? Well, so now we have this, we mean that we're going to be
positing some bigger Markov chain. And our observations will be some trace chains, right,
of that bigger chain. And the trace chain will have two ways that it's doing this observation. One is
the number of states that is tracing on, right? So that's going to be one parameter.
The more states you trace on, in some sense, the better spatial resolution you've got, right?
Right. So the, so if I have, you know, if my big chain has 1000 states, that would be a very big
chain, at least for my computer. And suppose I have a trace chain that's only 10 states versus
another one that's 100 states versus another one that's 500 substates of the big chain, right?
The one that 500 substates is in some sense a higher resolution observation than the one that
only has, you know, 50 states. The 50 state one is observing the big 1000 state one. It is observing
it, but not nearly with the resolution of the, you know, 500 state one. Almost like quantifying
that sort of objective. It gives you complete quantification. And for the physicists, this
would be our quantification of what they call Q squared, which is their technical thing for
spatial resolution. It's tied to the amount of energy that they use, when higher energy
leads to better spatial resolution. So what we're basically now doing is identifying
higher energies with greater spatial resolution in our trace chains, which is that itself is
a non-trivial statement. There's a lot that's said there, obviously, because it's very complex
and a lot of people find it very difficult. I've noticed a lot of people find your theory
so fascinating and want to jump on board so badly, but the math and the physics
become so complicated that they just can't do it. And the only way I can is when, is by first,
obviously chatting to you, watching, reading your content, but then chatting to friends or
physicists, trying to get their opinion on all of this and trying from their perspective to
understand what you're talking about. And the more I do, the easier it gets. It gets to sort of
understand it. But I still feel left in the dark knowing that you have access to more information
based on the base of knowledge you have within physics and mathematics. Have you felt that it's
a bit of a struggle to try and get this out there because of the complexity of this topic?
Do you feel people find that you're hiding behind these sort of fancy words? Because I've noticed
that a lot of people comment about that saying that, okay, once you mention decorated permutations
or permutations, or once you mention Mark of Blankets, you're just trying to sound smart.
But that's not the case. Because when I chat to my physicists, friends, they seem to know what
you're talking about a lot better than the layman. If someone thinks that, I mean, we have a paper
called Fusions of Consciousness. So you can just go look at the paper Fusions of Consciousness.
And we don't just mention the word decorated permutation, we actually create a new mathematics
of decorated permutations for Mark of Chains. So it's not just handwaves. I only talk about it
because we're using it and we're using it to good purpose. I'll put a link to Fusions of Consciousness.
And I think that one came out in January, if I'm not... Yeah, in January, that's right.
So I'll just mention that. So I agree with what you're saying that it's difficult and I try to
talk about this stuff in a way that's generally accessible. But the problem is, of course, if
you do that, then people say, well, it's not serious. And if you do it seriously, then I
can't understand it. He's just throwing out these technical words. So it's a catch 22. But my attitude
is what I do get potential graduate students. And this is one reason why I do these podcasts.
And I'm interested in getting young people who are young enough that they can start to learn
the math and make contributions, get them excited and get them studying this stuff. I spent an hour
and a half with one student, potential student yesterday talking about and gave her a bunch of
math to read. And so that's what I'm doing it for, is to actually get graduate students working on
their PhDs in this field. That's my goal. I've noticed someone else who has this problem because
it's Carl Friston. When I chatted to Carl, and we spoke about his approach to the free energy
principle, he has exactly the same issue. He's often accused of hiding behind fancy talk, they
sort of say. So you really are stuck between a rock and a hard place. How do you dumb down
something that is so complex? Do you find that there's a specific way you think that's best to
approach this so far? Have you hacked the code yet? Well, for communicating it,
probably the best approach that I've seen so far to get people to take this idea seriously and to
not just dismiss it, is to point out the failure of physical hysteries. That seems, because I'm,
some of my say, look, the brain does it. Forget all this stuff about
consciousness. I mean, look at all the physical hysteria. It's clear we have all these neural
correlates of consciousness. We're almost there. We're getting these neural, we got lots of neural
correlates of consciousness. We have all these nice integrated information theory. We have
orchestrated collapse of quantum states of microtubules. We have attention to schema theory.
There's, I think I already mentioned integrated information. So there's just a bunch of these,
oh, global workspace theory is another big one. It's a global workspace theory. So why do we need
someone who's clearly off and moving land and talking to the same consciousness is fundamental
and so forth? And so for me, the thing that I think is the most grabbing thing to say is,
if you ask any of these theorists, opponents of these theories, okay, you're integrated
information theory. This is the theory about conscious experiences. Okay. So you're starting
with some substrate, maybe it's physical or some other substrate, and you have this causal
architecture that's got the right pattern of integrated information. And you're saying that
that will explain the qualia of specific conscious experiences called the color green,
color green, the taste of chocolate, the smell of garlic, the experience of auditory space versus
the experience of visual space or the experience of haptic space as conscious experiences. So
which, so clearly you've been at this for a couple of decades. So you must have a whole
bunch of conscious experiences that you can now say this is the pattern of integrated information
that must be the taste of chocolate. So give me what have you got? Zero. And you go to every
theory and you ask them, so what have you got? How many qualia have you given me the global
workspace architecture for or the orchestrated collapse of quantum states with neuronal microtubules
or integrated information, what they call the Q shape? How many do you have? Zero in every case.
So we have these theories that have been out there for decades, decades now that are batting
zero. And I'm saying they're batting zero for principled reasons. Spacetime, the physicists,
the high energy theoretical physicists are telling us, spacetime is not fundamental and
reductionism is false. These theories are failing because they're not listening to modern high
energy theoretical physicists that are telling us that that game is over. We're playing an old
game. It's like someone after Einstein trying to play the Newtonian game in understanding chemistry.
Yes. Good luck. You can't understand chemistry using Newton. You have to use quantum mechanics.
I'm sorry, I shouldn't have said Einstein, I should have said quantum theory.
Yes. So done before you move on from that. I've because one of the questions one of the
questions from the audience. So I gathered a bunch from YouTube, Twitter, etc.
Unfortunately, sometimes I forgot to actually write on the person's name. So I've just left
them all out together. So I'm just going to ask you them at random. But one of the questions was
directed at one of your statements, because you've said this before, you're talking about the taste
of chocolate, you're talking about the smell of garlic. This person says that whenever you mention
those specific states, they want to know why do you want such a direct portion of consciousness.
So let's say when you're asking for that qualitative qualia experience of the taste of
chocolate, why go after a specific state? Because everything in the mind is so blurry,
so mismatched, there's so much going on, there's so much, let's say heuristics involved.
Wouldn't that be a bad approach to trying to provide proof of a theory?
Well, all I'm doing is saying to the people who are offering these theories, like the integrated
information theory or global workspace, whatever, they're the ones that are saying,
we will start with neural activity or this Q shape, and we will give you
conscious experiences. We will give you these experiences. I'm saying, okay,
that's what you're promising to do. So I'm just asking you, since that's what you said you're
going to do, I'm just asking you how is it going? By the way, I asked Julia Tononi this back in
late 1990s, he came to UC Irvine to our Helmholtz Club meeting, and I asked him that,
and he didn't have any done, and I asked him a few years ago in Canada at a conference,
asked him again, and he admitted he needed to offer one, and he couldn't. And same thing with
Stuart Hammerhoff, I mean, I had him at a conference in front of 400 or 500 people,
I asked him, you know, so Stuart, how's it going? I mean, you're promising that we'll start with
these orchestrated collapses, and you'll give us specific conscious experiences. So which ones,
I mean, that's what you claim that you're doing. So how many conscious experiences have you nailed
down? And I had to push him for three or four minutes before he finally said, because he was
hemming and homing. And I said, no, no, no, Stuart, give me one. No, Stuart, give me one.
And he finally said, no, I can't give you one. So I'm just, now, if they want to say, you know,
we have these wonderful theories, integrative information theory, and they have nothing to do
with the taste of chocolate and the smell of garlic, fine, then I won't ask you the question.
But if they do say that, then hey, the science is science, where's the beef? So that's why I do it.
Don, I'm curious about your opinion. Was it about, it was about two months ago, I think,
about the IIT. Swaray, I mean, that was such a major issue within the philosophy community here,
and science community in general. What were your thoughts on that? Just for the context for
the listeners, it's the whole debacle way IIT was accused of being pseudoscience.
Right. That's right. And when I looked at the letter that was put out there and the references
that they gave, one of the things they referenced was Michael Graziano on a paper of his on
attentional schema theory, where it basically says theory of consciousness is either mechanical
or it's magical. And so the, the signers of that were basically signing on to look at theory of
consciousness is either mechanical and presumably neuro mechanical, but maybe AI kind of mechanical,
but, but most of them are thinking neuro mechanical, right? Or it's magical. And so what, what, so the
argument is that IIT is claiming some kind of substrate independence. There is a substrate,
so that it doesn't say that consciousness is fundamental. It says there is a substrate to
consciousness, but the substrate might not be physical. Of course, they're, they're thinking
it's physical, right? That's, I mean, ask them, so what is, so how many non physical substrates
are you, you know, have you concentrated everything? So what are you going to say,
ectoplasm? I don't know. So, so, but anyway, they're, they're, they're saying that there's a
substrate, but they're not committed to a neural, put it this way, there's not necessarily a neural
substrate. It could be some kind of computational architecture that's completely non neural. So,
so I don't think they're going non physical, but they could be going non neural. And
so that means that they're, they're dealing with something that is, it looks like a disembodied
mathematical causal structure, right? Although the IIT people would of course say it has to be
instantiated and something. So the substrate is, is, is important. But somehow they think that because
it's not, they're not tying, they're not starting with neurons. They're not starting with, with
neural circuitry or something like that and trying to show that that leads to consciousness. They're
starting with something more abstract and not necessarily mechanical. It's not like this fires
and that fires and we have this circuit and so forth. It's more abstract mathematical kind of
thing. So I'm just trying to explain the kind of get in the heads of the people that are,
they're worried about this. They're, and so they're, they're concerned about that. Now my,
my attitude is, I think that all of these theories have the problem that I just mentioned, which is
there's no beef. There's no, no success in the, in terms of specific conscious experiences. And,
and what's happened is all the physicalists, I think that they're starting to understand
that they're not, they have nothing in terms of concrete conscious experiences that they can explain
without hand waves. They're zero. They're forming a circular firing squad, right? They're, they're,
they're shooting at each other and, and everybody's vulnerable to the, the objection that I just gave.
The objection is you claim that you'll start with integrated information or I start with,
you know, higher order theory. Now, now we're doing the neural stuff, higher order theories or
first order theories or global workspace theory. And I'm going to give you specific conscious
experiences. Which one? Oh, I can't give you any right now. How long we've been doing this? Decades.
We've been doing this for decades and can't give me one. So, so at some point people get impatient
and go, you know, no, no, I should say I'm good friends. These are, these are my friends and
colleagues, right? So they're brilliant. Some of them are geniuses. All of them are brilliant. And
some of them are geniuses. Why are they not making progress? There is not because they're not smart.
They're brilliant. They're not making progress because we're not listening to what the high
energy theoretical physicists are telling us. Space time is doomed and reductionism is false.
We have to listen to our best current science. It was fine 30 years ago to assume that space
time is fundamental and reductionism is the way to go. In fact, it was the right
approach given our current science at the time. But it's no longer, it's no longer feasible. It's
ignoring, it's frankly just ignoring our best science. And that's not what we want to do.
So my prediction is as soon as these brilliant colleagues and friends of mine
really understand that we need a new framework and they switch, I think all of a sudden we'll make
some serious progress on this field. And we'll look back and realize that we're in sort of the
Flat Earth period of this field. And as long as you assume Flat Earth, you can't do a space program.
As soon as you let go of Flat Earth, then you start to have the tools that you need to actually
start doing a space program. You mentioned Michael Graziano. He was the first person I
interviewed on this podcast. And this feels like ages ago. But I remember him saying that
if you take attention schema theory and you plop it on top of global workspace theory,
he believes that together it actually would provide a very complete theory of consciousness.
But I can't help but think based on the fact that he's saying that based on the fact that
they used it's either mechanical or magical. Do you think it would be similar to compare
Michael's theory and global workspace if they continue to do as well as they do separately and
maybe even together to be the Newton's theory in physics or Newtonian physics of the brain?
And then while you guys are going on to sort of do the Einstein's theory of consciousness,
do you think you guys are going to approach consciousness in that sort of way?
Yeah. Now, I should be very, very clear that I think that the work that they're doing
on getting models of the neural correlates of consciousness is brilliant and useful and that
will survive. But it's not a theory of the generation of consciousness. It's a theory about
how we see consciousness correlated with parts of brain activity. So I'm all for that. Now,
my understanding about Graziano is at least in some of his writings, I've gotten the impression
that he thinks that the conscious experiences is in some sense an illusion. There aren't really
quality, but we have the illusion. He calls it a caricature. He actually intentionally avoids
the word illusion. Right. So if he doesn't want to use the word illusion, Keith Frankish does.
So Keith does use the word illusion. And if Michael wants to use caricature, that's fine.
But as a scientist, my feeling, I'll say first about the illusion approach.
And I've said this to, I mean, Keith is a great guy. I really enjoy talking with him. I feel
he's a friend and so forth. But I've pointed this out to him and he hasn't demurred that saying that
it's an illusion doesn't get him off the hook because we now need a scientific theory about what
specific pattern of brain activity must be the illusion of the taste of chocolate and could
not be the illusion of garlic. So you might think, oh, well, now that they said it's an illusion,
they don't have the problem, the problems bring up. No, no, no, no, no. They have,
we have to do science here. If you're saying it's an illusion, I want to have a precise scientific
theory about why that has to be that illusion and couldn't be, you know, this illusion.
They call it the illusion problem. That's right. And I would say the same thing,
you know, from Graziano, if it's a character, then why should this particular brain activity be
the caricature of the color green and not the caricature of the color red? I mean, I want to,
again, as a scientist, I don't want to hand wave and I don't want to say because I called it
caricature. I don't owe you a scientific theory. I mean, I'm not interested. I'm interested in
results. I want a theory where the existence of illusion or a caricature or the real qualia.
I want a theory that gives me the beef and says this pattern must be this caricature and it couldn't
be that caricature. Otherwise, I mean, I'm philosophy is fine. I have a joint appointment
in philosophy. I love philosophy, but I'm talking science here. And so I want a scientific theory.
So that's sort of my attitude about that whole thing.
Yeah. And I think what I was trying to get at was, it will still be very useful and it will
actually work in the sense that in the same way Newtonian physics works, because we still use
it, it's still very practical. It's just doesn't go away. So in that sense, it will still be very,
very good at its job. I agree. But also, you'll have some, with Newton, you have some misconceptions.
You have the idea that, well, I should be able to get the position and the momentum
at the same time to arbitrary accuracy when I'm looking at stuff. So you're led to believe
certain things. Well, that turned out to be false. And so the absolutely Newton is great
if you want to send a rocket to the moon, it'll work. And for a lot of everyday stuff.
But sometimes it leads you into conceptual errors, like position momentum. And something like
these physicalist theories, I think they will be very, very good for the neural correlates
of consciousness and so forth. But they're going to lead to some, they are leading to what I think
are fundamental errors. And I'll name one that I think is a crucial error. They want to make
a distinction between which circuits of the brain or which physical objects in general
are conscious, which ones are not. So they want to use IIT in hospitals to determine whether
someone's a vegetable or not. You know, should we pull the plug or not? So that's something that
you as a doctor are quite interested in, I'm sure. And so they're making the assumption
that some physical systems are associated with consciousness and others are not.
That's their assumption. Now, if it turns out that space time isn't fundamental,
and objects in space time are not fundamental. In other words, if we listen to what the high
energy theoretical physicists are telling us, and they're saying that there are structures
outside of space time, and they're finding them like amplituhedron and decorated permutations.
What is space time? It's not the fundamental reality anymore and objects in space time are not.
So now we have to understand what is that. And so what I'm proposing is that space time
and objects in space time are just a headset, just an interface. So think about it that way.
Here I'm using an interface to talk with you. And I see I'm using Zoom, we're talking about Zoom.
And I see a bunch of pixels on the screen. And I see pixels of Tevin's face.
And I see also pixels of a wall behind you. Now, I'm getting a lot of conscious input from the
pixels on your face. I mean, I can see your expression. I can see if you're interested or not.
The pixels on the wall, not much. Now, I could say, aha, so I want to have
the pixel correlates of consciousness. So these are the conscious pixels,
the ones on and those are the conscious pixels in Tevin's face. And the ones on the wall, those
are not conscious pixels. And so now I'm going to have my little mathematical model. These pixels
are conscious and those pixels are not because these have some complicated pattern of interaction
and those do not. Well, that's completely wrongheaded. Pixels are pixels, period. Some
they're not conscious or unconscious. They're they're a merely a headset, an interface.
Some pixels give me access to a conscious consciousness behind the Zoom. And others don't.
And so when you realize that that's so that is a fundamental difference here.
Right. If we use something like integrated information theory, which is saying certain
physical systems are conscious and others are not, I'm saying that claim is absolutely false.
And it's dangerous to assume it in hospital settings. So this is the academic.
Yes. So now this goes beyond this is very practical. This becomes very important
for us as a society. And that's actually the main when I started the podcast.
One of the one of the description layers was this podcast is function is to show just how
difficult intellectually and practically the mind, body problems, because the moment you
do finally figure out whatever theory of consciousness you want to develop and grow,
it has so many practical implications. And in this case, I mean, you're touching on a very,
very big one. I mean, debt that we're talking life and death of this.
Absolutely. And pulling the plug or not. And it's if the foundation is so wrong that it's
actually it's at the level of saying these pixels are conscious and these pixels are not is that
kind of error. Then we have to be very, very careful about it. So, so, so this is not just
academic anymore, saying that space time as a headset has real, real implications,
moral implications, and technological implications. And it also has implications for the whole debate
about can AI be conscious, right? This gives you the standard way that that's considered. And again,
it brings up all sorts of moral questions that people are worried about. But the way it's thought
about is we have a physical system that a priori is not conscious. Somehow, if we give it the right
kind of complexity, computational complexity, it will be conscious. Well, that's exactly the same
mistake as saying if I get the right kind of complexity in the zoom pixel activity,
it'll be consciousness. No, it's not. It's just so certain zoom pixels give me a portal into
Tevin's consciousness. And other zoom pixels on my screen don't give me any portals into Tevin's
consciousness. The pixels are not conscious or unconscious. It's about the headset and how it's
engaged to what's beyond space time was outside the space time and how it's effectively or not
effectively giving us access to what's beyond space time. The whole point of a headset is to
simplify things. And at some point, you're going to simplify things so, so much that you can't really
say much about it, right? When I look at you, my interface has given me a portal into your
consciousness that's good, not perfect. Even if you've lived with someone, you've been married to
someone for 30 years, you find out that there's things you don't know, right? So it's not a
perfect portal. But when I look at my cat, the portal is even worse. And when I look at an ant,
it's even worse, and a microbe, it's even worse. When I look at a rock, my headset is given up.
Because headsets are there to simplify things. At some point, it has to give up.
So it's not that the rock is, it's not that like the Tevin human body is conscious or not
conscious, and the rock is conscious. It's just that these are symbols that give us portals into
a preexisting consciousness or not. In the case of the rock, my idea is that we're interacting
with consciousness all the time. But when I see a rock, I'm not getting much insight into the
consciousness that I'm interacting with. It's not, so I'm not saying the rock is conscious,
it's not panpsychism. So I'm not, I'm not a panpsychist. Headset is a headset, consciousness is
consciousness. I'm not saying that, you know, the most panpsychists are thinking that that
space time is fundamental. Particles are fundamental. But behind the equations of physics and behind
the particles, what breathes fire into the equations and life into the particles is consciousness
inside space time. But we'll keep the same laws of physics and so forth, you know. So
consciousness is sort of almost along for the ride, but the laws of physics are really doing all the,
I'm having, I'm good friends with Philip Goff and we have good discussions on that. And Philip
has said to me that he's willing to let go of space time, but we'll see, you know, I'll push
to let go of that. And if he does, I think we'll be very, very close in our views. But so, you know,
I think that, well, I think I'll just stop there. I'm going to chat to Philip and I think
Jan of Feb, I can't remember when we scheduled it, but I'm going to ask him about this. I'm going
to see how close he's gotten to that sort of conversion. But I'm glad you're touching, as it
stands, Don, you're touching on some practical stuff at the moment. And this is what I sort of
premised a lot of these questions on, which is great, because I think that these practical
implications of understanding this headset or understanding this virtual reality, this matrix,
whatever people want to call it, it's pretty much the same thing. You are saying that this world
we're living in is a sort of simulation in that sense, it is a virtual reality. Some people love
you using the word matrix, just to be clear, it's not the same type of matrix as from the movie,
but nevertheless, the word matrix seems to be now synonymous with simulation. In this virtual
reality, you just go to this question that I have for you. How do mental health or mental
disabilities work within this sort of framework? Does your work now give you a sort of, I know
you have to now almost become a philosopher and sort of maybe even guesstimate certain aspects
of this, because it's very difficult to go outside this box already. And to go even further beyond
space time to now give me mental health theories is going to be even more difficult. But just out
of curiosity, what is it? Is it a bug in the actual virtual reality? What's going on here?
So the way I think about it is that there's space and time and what we see in space and time is
just a headset. And behind the headset is this realm of consciousness. So that's another part
of the ontology that we're proposing. I'm not saying I'm right, I'm just saying I'm trying to be
precise. And I've got to say something specific. So I'm saying that there's a vast social network
of conscious agents that in some sense, probably are ultimately, I'll realize that there's one
conscious agent and this network is just a nice analytic tool that I have to use as a scientist.
So I'll talk about there's one conscious agent, but I'm using this network, because that's what
I need to use to do mathematics. So that one conscious agent, what is it up to?
And why, right? I don't know. So I guess, but one possibility is
it's a theorem that no system can ever understand itself completely.
If I have a computer system and it wants to understand itself, it has to build a model of
itself. Well, as soon as it builds a model of itself, now it's more complicated. So now to
understand itself, the new self of the model is going to have to model itself with a model,
and you get in this infinite recursion. So maybe what the, maybe the one infinite consciousness,
which transcends any particular instantiation, like a spacetime instantiation or whatever,
you know, we have a three dimensions of space, one dimension of time, what about a 50 dimensions
of space in one dimension of time? I can see seven million colors. Why not 20 trillion colors?
And new, in other words, this is just one possible form instantiation that the consciousness can use
out of an infinite potential to look at itself. So what consciousness is up to is looking at itself
from different perspectives, and then losing itself in the perspective, identify. So I'm now
identified with the Hoffman body. I think I'm only, you know, I'm just that, and I'm nothing more,
and I'm afraid of death and the whole bit. And then slowly waking up and realizing, oh, no, no,
I now know myself because I know I'm not Hoffman. So all the stuff that I thought I was,
and I immersed myself, you know, both feet, I jumped in with both feet on this thing,
and spent 70 years, 80 years, 90 years, and then woke up. And now I know myself because I know,
I know myself better because I know I'm not that. So knowing yourself by a bunch of negations.
And so now, from that point of view, the one can know itself by being a paraplegic,
or having, you know, Alzheimer's, or you're having, you know, any kind of mental disease
you want, some kind of nervous breakdown. I just have nervous breakdowns all the time,
or whatever it might be. Or I also experienced myself as being, you know, the world's fastest
Olympic runner, and the world's Einstein, and then I'll wake up, but I'm not that either.
So in other words, essentially, even behind someone who looks completely debilitated
is this infinite consciousness, just looking at itself. So in that point of view,
everything deserves equal respect, right? So there's, there's a moral aspect to this, which
says when I see someone who has an IQ of 50, there's no difference between me and that.
When I look at my cat, is I am the same one consciousness that's also looking at me through
the cat. Those are just different avatars of the one consciousness from this point of view.
So what happens from this point of view is there is no grounds for
putting barriers between me and anybody else. This actually says I am that just looking at it
through a different interface. And this I think is the foundation for a genuine love,
that love is recognizing is not just loving the other as yourself, it's recognizing that
the other is yourself. It's you, the infinite consciousness looking at yourself through a
different avatar. You see this sort of play out in a lot of ancient cultures as well, where
let's say someone goes out and hunts for food, they kill the animal and they sort of pray to it,
hug it, do a sort of sing songs around it, because they know they have to eat this being
that is sort of still part of them. And this is quite a recurring theme with religions,
with sort of spiritualists. And I've noticed a lot of idealist theories in general tend to lead
to this. That's right. I didn't intend to go there. Yeah, which is quite fascinating.
I mean, I was just sort of led by, you know, if I'm going to assume that consciousness is
fundamental, and I started this one step after another, and I sort of led kicking and screaming
to this, but now that I've gone there, it starts to make sense. It's so counterintuitive,
but that counterintuitiveness might just be the one jumped in with both feet, and it let
itself get completely lost in it. In other words, if you're really going to know that you're not
that, you have to believe that you are it for a while. You really let yourself believe it and
then wake up. And then you really, you took that very, very seriously. You really understood what
it meant to be a Tevin or a Don or, you know, Michael Graziano or whoever it might be. You
learned what it meant to be that, and you realized, I'm not that. I am this consciousness that transcends
that. It's like when Bernardo talks about this dissociated altars, I mean, off a universal
mind, Bernardo Castro, when he says, it's pretty much the same in that universal mind. And we're
just these avatars or dissociated altars of the same sort of entity. There is no separation here
at all. That's right. So I'm pretty much on the same page with Bernardo on most things. One little
wrinkle that we add though, and it may not be just a little wrinkle is that this trace logic that I
mentioned at the start is the first formal structure I found outside of space time about
the structure of the one. And it's a non-bullion logic. And there's no global complement.
So this is the first hint I've gotten of a structure. And I'm not saying that this is
the final word about the structure of one. Absolutely not. But it's the first baby step.
And the first baby step in terms of a mathematical model of, quote unquote, God of the one
is already blowing my mind because it's not clear what the word one even means. If this thing
is not a bullion logic, there is no like one top Markovian kernel. So I use the word one,
but right now when I use it, already my math is telling me, Don, you're gonna have to think
deeper that the word one doesn't, whatever kind of unity that is, is not a trivial unity. And it's
not a bullion logic by any means. So what do you mean by the one? So already the math,
I might be using the same words that the religious people are using have used for thousands of years.
But already the math is telling me this goes way, way deeper than I'd ever imagined. And
probably way deeper than the human mind because of the interface limitations we have.
Because that's another one of my questions at some point. I mean, how far do you think you're
going to get on knowing that we are limited, in essence, and we're never really, we never
really evolved the capability to perceive truth. I mean, we know the difference between proofs and
truths, the verticality. How close do you really think that this will take you?
So sorry, I was going to say that's always a tough question. I mean, when we know that
we're so limited, it's so difficult for us to really go beyond anything further and deeper.
Does that ever keep you up at night?
Well, I think about it quite a bit. I tried to do it during the day.
Here's one important aspect of it, though, and that is what is the nature of scientific theory
building? What are scientific theories? What do we mean by scientific theory? A theory in science
says, please grant me these assumptions. And if you grant me these assumptions and I can make
them mathematically precise, so I'll make these assumptions mathematically precise,
then I can derive and predict all these wonderful things.
And so that's, and if you do it right, the mathematical description of the theory will
tell you the scope of those assumptions, how much that they can really do, their power,
and it will also tell you the limits, like Einstein's special theory and general theory
of relativity. They tell you this great scope of the mathematics tells you it's incredible,
predicts black holes, and all of a sudden it's amazing that it works really well.
It also tells you when you combine it with Einstein's contribution to quantum theory,
E equals H nu, you combine that with that, it tells you that space time is doomed at 10 to the
minus 33 centimeters. So it tells you that Einstein's theory is beautiful theory, it tells you the
scope and the limits, 10 to the minus 33, that theory dies, 10 to the minus 43 seconds, it's over.
So now you might say, well, of course, that's true of any theory, but I can now give you a deeper
theory that explains those assumptions of the theory that you just saw give you a deeper
theory. Absolutely, you can always get a deeper theory, but your new deeper theory will have
its own assumptions. And this goes on ad infinitum. So my take on it is science is one of the best
tools we have. I'm doing science, I love science. And science, after billions and billions of years,
if we continue to do it for billions and billions of years, the fraction of knowledge that we would
have about reality is precisely measure zero, precisely measure zero. And yet, we have to do it.
We can never, with science, write a theory of everything. So when we talk about a theory of
everything, real scientists do it with a week and a nod. It's a theory of everything so far,
and so far is pretty trivial. So I think it's, in principle, the case that scientific theories
can never be a theory of everything. But what they can tell us their limits, that's what's
powerful about science, that the theories of science tell us their limits, like the theory of
evolution of natural selection actually entails that spacetime isn't fundamental. And Einstein's
theory of spacetime entails that spacetime isn't fundamental. These theories tell you
their limits, right? Because evolution of natural selection, the way Darwin was thinking about it,
is talking about organisms in space and time, competing for resources in space and time.
And when you look at evolutionary game theory, it tells you that the very categories of space
and time and objects are not the fundamental reality. Those are just headset categories.
So it tells you its limits. I think what our theories do, that's essential, is they do tell us
truths about the particular perspective that our headset gives us. So science can give us
truths about our headset. There's an infinite reality of consciousness that transcends any
scientific theory. But we can look at different perspectives on that, different possible headsets.
Right now, all of science has been looking at a particular spacetime headset, three dimensions
of space, one dimension of time, 10 to the minus 33 centimeters, it's over with. It's a fairly cheap
headset. We thought it was the final reality. It just turned out to be a knockoff cheap headset.
But now we've learned the tools inside the headset. We studied the headset, we thought we
were studying the truth, it was just the headset. But now that we have the tools, we can step outside
the headset and imagine other headsets and imagine, and that's all my theory of consciousness is.
It's just a projecting model of consciousness. There's no longer taking spacetime as fundamentals,
taking consciousness as fundamental, but I'm recognizing I can never get a theory of the
ultimate consciousness. Let me start off with little networks of consciousness, because I can
model that, and that's just going to be a projection at best of the deeper reality.
So every question you ask, I mean, the answer is not trivial.
We, science can never get a theory of everything, but we can get good theories of projections of
reality. And then just to put a spiritual twist on it, but you are that reality. You are,
from this point of view. And in some sense, you can know at first hand, by just letting go of any
theory and letting go of and just being. So when you just sit in meditation, that is the closest
you're going to get to what transcends any scientific theory. It's incredible because
I've chatted to you many times and I know how you think and I can tell, well, I don't know exactly
how you think, but I know how science minded you are and how much it must perhaps annoy you when
you're clumped into categories of thinkers when you are actively doing science. Because I know that
there are many people I've spoken to on this channel who have the same problem. The moment
you step outside any sort of status quo, you're automatically grouped together as either some
sort of a hippie scientist or a spiritualist thinker. And they give you these labels that I
think are unwarranted and for the most part unfair. And someone who has a similar issue is
Thomas Campbell. Because when I spoke to him, your theories are very similar. And one of the
questions I wrote down here, and he radiates this because he's trying his best to not be
associated any form of religion sort of dogma because he does try and explain things outside
of the realm of what we say quote unquote is normal. The question I have here is, and this is not
from me, this is from one of the viewers. Where does Thomas Campbell's theory start and
Donald Hoffman's theory end? They're just trying to ask, what's the difference between these two
different types of virtual realities you guys are talking about? Because they're both very similar.
And yet they are very different. I think this person obviously just does not see the greater
detail in them. Right. So I did have a conversation with Tom and so I could actually
point out there is a podcast where Tom and I go into this in great detail. So I can
give you the link to it. Yeah, I'll give you the link to it. So I'll just give a short answer
because that's, I mean, Tom and I go at it for an hour or two. So it's very friendly, of course,
very friendly. But so he calls it my big toe because there's a big theory of everything.
And so I just given you my theory of everything, what that means. And so
at the very end of our conversation, I pushed him on it. I said, look,
there is no such thing as a theory of everything. Wouldn't you agree? And ultimately,
he agreed. There is no theory of everything. Initially, I thought that that might be a big
difference between us. But I really wanted to find out. I mean, do you really believe, Tom,
that you've got the final word on truth with your theory? Because I don't. If you do believe
that, then my theory is utterly different from yours because I think all I've got is a little
tiny baby step outside of our headset. And that's all I've got. And I'm never going to have a
theory of everything. So the difference I see between us just in terms of practical theory
building is he's using a lot of quantum theoretical ideas in his approach, right? A lot of it is
using, I mean, he's got advanced, I guess he didn't get his PhD, but he's done advanced research
and advanced study, a graduate study in physics. You know, I think he does. I think he's in New
York. Does he have a PhD? Yeah, in New York. Okay, so he does have a PhD in nuclear physics. Okay,
good. So he's a genuine PhD in physics. And I think that he's trying to use
quantum theory, sort of quantum ideas that are foundational in what he's trying to build.
And from my point of view, again, the high energy theoretical physicists in the last 20 years
are telling us that not only is space time doomed, quantum theory is doomed.
They're saying that quantum theory will arise joined at the hip with space time.
You might say, well, you know, there's all this weird stuff about quantum mechanics. There's no
cloning theorem. You can't clone quantum bits. There's superposition. There's entanglement.
This is all weird stuff. And this is surely showing us something deeper about, you know,
maybe a conscious reality beyond space time. And the answer appears that
from the work of Chris Fuchs on quantum Bayesianism and Robert Speckens, his toy model of quantum
physics, all those weirdnesses of quantum theory, no cloning theorem, superposition,
entanglement, all that stuff, is simply a symptom of incomplete information.
If you have incomplete information about the state of a system, those all follow as theorems.
Well, when I say that space time is a headset, that means incomplete information. Your headset
is there to chop down the information. That's the whole point of an interface is too complicated
out there. So let's dumb it down. Well, so quantum mechanics and all the weirdness of quantum
mechanics is merely a symptom of the fact that space time is doomed. So it's not going to give us,
so quantum theory by itself is not going to take us outside space time. Quantum theory has its
weirdnesses because it's tied to the limits of space time. So what's different between my approach
and Tom's is, and by the way, most people who are trying to use some kind of modern physics
to do some kind of exploration of consciousness, they're tied to many of our arts. Quantum is it,
right? And I'm saying, not if you believe the high energy theoretical physicists,
it's not it. It's going to arise from deeper structures. And by the way, it's not a hand wave.
So they found like the amplitude hydrant is, is the structure outside of space time. It's a real
structure is published, you can go read about it. Its volumes give you the scattering amplitudes
of real processes in space time, much easier than doing Feynman diagrams in space time.
Hundreds of pages of Feynman diagrams, two or three, turn into two or three terms,
you can do by hand. And there are no Hilbert spaces to be seen anywhere in the amplitude hydrant.
And therefore, there is no quantum theory. And in the physics like Neymar, Connie,
Hamed and these guys who are doing this are very, very clear. There is no quantum theory here.
This is beyond space time and quantum theory. Uniterity, which is one of the key things we
can talk about Uniterity. I mean, there are some who argue that Uniterity is not essential to
quantum theory, but most physicists say it is. Uniterity and locality are products of this
thing, but they're not built into the thing. They, they can give it to you in the projection,
but they are, they are outside of space time, and they're outside of quantum theory.
So, so it's, you can see that the difference, maybe at a, at some level, Tom and I are,
our concepts are similar, but the spirit in which we're doing things is very, very different.
I'm saying, I'm, I'm letting go of quantum theory entirely, I'm letting go of space time entirely.
And I feel like Tom is still saying, let me use the tools of quantum theory and the most
advanced physics we have of, of space time to get my model of consciousness. I'm saying,
we really have to jump outside of the headset altogether.
Yes. No, I agree with you because I found that question quite redundant in the sense that
there are clear differences in the way you guys approach it. I think where you guys do start to
sort of become similar is when it starts becoming a virtual reality and when,
and when you start talking about that. But then I have another question from someone,
and this question is directed at both of us, actually,
for critique for the two of us. It says, in our last conversation on conscious agents and
the subatomic world, Tev, you and Don, do not define information. And this, so the person's
basically, it's a very lengthy comment goes on to say that we didn't clearly define the term
information. And since your, the work eventually goes so much into a sort of a virtual reality,
a sort of matrix simulation, information becomes a key word here. Do we, should we clarify that for
this listener just to make sure they understand? Right. I used Shannon information. So people
who've studied information theory, if I have, it's all about probabilities and basically,
if something has probability P, then it's minus log P is so Shannon information. Now,
I've been, when I use entropy, I'm using the standard, you know, Shannon notion of entropy
from information theory. So, so this is, I'm just using standard and
standard information theoretic stuff. I've explored
solace entropy. So there's, there are generalizations of Shannon entropy and some arguments for this.
So I've been exploring them, but I haven't used them yet. And if I'm forced to, I may, there are
arguments for, for showing that, that the notion of entropy that's used in Shannon information
theory may not be as general as we need in certain cases. And there are more, and one is called solace
entropy, I think. So, so I am playing with that. But in my conversations with you, when I've said
entropy or, or, or information, it's Shannon. Okay, good. The next one is, if we're just avatars
within this virtual reality, what is the concept of procreation? What, what purpose does this
serve in the creation of other avatars? And does this even work inside of space time?
Right. So, what's, what's interesting is that from this point of view, our headset gives us
certain portals into the deep consciousness beyond. That's what the headset is for, too. So right now,
my Tevin icon in my headset is giving me a portal into Tevin's consciousness or that, that, that
projection of the one consciousness, the Tevin projection of the, of the one consciousness.
So we know that our headset does give us portals into consciousness. And the question is, what
technologies might there be that we could use to create new portals into consciousness? Right.
Well, we have one technology that we know, and that is having babies. That is, that's one technology
for opening up new portals into consciousness. So, so why would from, so there are a couple of
questions related to this. So why would the one consciousness use this procreation kind of approach
toward, toward, toward, you know, doing this? And I would say that it's, first I should say, I don't
know, but, but I'll give you some ideas. Right. Humility is, is, is required at every step of
this, right? I mean, until we have a scientific theory where we're making predictions, you know,
disclaimers, but at some point, I think we'll, we'll be able to reverse engineer the headset and
understand this notion of portal that I'm talking about quite precisely. We'll understand a little
bit more how procreation works in terms of booting up new, new, new portals. And we'll be able to
build artificial portals. We'll, we'll get the technology to build artificial portals to the
consciousness behind. We'll, we'll actually understand what kind of networking of conscious
agents is required to effectively bridge into our interface and toward, into our common headset.
So, but, but at the top level, why is the one doing this? It goes back to what we talked about
before, which is the one is trying to, to know itself and it can only know itself by knowing
what it's not. So to keep having experiences and having an opening this up to a sort of
multiplex of different experiences overall, which goes into the other question that I have here,
which is, did in this framework then, where dinosaurs and all sort of extinct species and
creatures fall into this sort of process, have these all been avatars as part of an experience
of the one? Exactly. They would be, and you might say, well, why did the, you know, the one do that
and then throw them away? And, you know, what a waste of time. And that gets the whole notion of
time itself is an artifact of our interface. So in our, so, so a lot of our intuitions are tied to
artifacts of our headset. So in our Markovian dynamics of conscious agents, the dynamics
need not have increasing entropy. There need not be an arrow of time in the dynamics outside of
our headset. But it's a theorem that if you take this Markovian dynamics in which the entropy is
constant, it doesn't increase. And you make a projection by conditional probability. So you're
losing some information, you see the dynamics, you see a dynamical system, but it's lost some
information over the deeper dynamics. The projected dynamical system will have increasing entropy.
And so it will have an arrow of time as not as an insight into reality. It's not an insight.
It's entirely an artifact of the loss of information. And so, by the way,
time is the fundamental limited resource in evolution. If I don't get food in time, I die.
If I don't mate in time, I die. If I don't run away from that dinosaur in time, I'll be eaten.
So time is the fundamental limited resource. And what I'm saying is that time is an illusion.
It's an artifact of the headset. So on the one hand, I've published papers on
evolutionary game theory. I love the theory of evolution. It's an incredibly powerful theory.
Evolutionary game theory is beautiful. And inside the headset, there is no better theory
of biological organisms than evolution by natural selection. It's brilliant.
That's being said. The theory itself, all of it, is an artifact of the projection.
None of it is deeply true. It's only true in our headset. And for understanding dynamics in our
headset, there is no better scientific tool than evolution by natural selection. And I've used it.
But our mathematics tells us that the whole thing is an illusion. So I should maybe stop there.
There was a question some people asked me, which is I use evolution to show that we don't see
reality as it is. But then that means that evolution wasn't true. So how am I not shooting
myself on the foot? So if we have time at the end, we can go after why I'm not shooting myself on
the foot. So within this headset and having this headset on, can I take it off?
I think yes. I think in the meditation process, when you literally, and myself included,
are not great meditators, but I do hear about people that I trust,
that go to places where you let go of the headset for a while. You just literally let go of death,
the near death experiences that people report, the Raymond Moody, I guess, and the tunnel,
the light tunnel, and life review, and that common thing. I'm not saying that that's right,
but it's suggestive that, and it certainly fits in with the ontology of this conscious
agent dynamics that I'm working on, that in some sense, everything that I perceive is just a headset,
and death is just taking the headset off. That's all it is. I tried that. But if you're playing
a virtual reality game, and you believe, and you've got an avatar in the game, so it's a first-person
perspective. If you identify with that avatar, if you really believe that that avatar is you,
you're going to be nervous and scared and everything that happens to the avatar is going
to be. But if you don't identify with the avatar, you can enjoy the game. And if your avatar gets
shot up, who cares? You just take the headset off. And so I think that it is possible, maybe in
meditation, the Hoffman hasn't done it. So I'll just tell you upfront, I've not gone there.
I've meditated quite a bit. So maybe I'm just a spiritual flunking, who knows.
Science flunking and spiritual flunking.
But the people that I trust seem to have had those experiences. And in my own theory,
it says it's possible even though I myself haven't experienced it.
So let's say within those kernels from the physics, from your mathematical side,
let's say you leave the headset. Would you have to first go via each pathway in order to get
to sort of the one? Or would you see someone else between them? I'm not sure if you understand
what I'm trying to say. A really great question. And I've really wondered about that myself,
because there are some spiritual traditions which talk about, I mean, I was some Tutu warrior in
my previous life or something like that. And so I've wondered if there's any way that I could
make sense of that in my framework of conscious agents. Is there some kind of, if I take the
network idea seriously, are there parts of the network that I could say that are sort of closer
to this particular headset, the Hoffman headset? Maybe there are other headsets that are closer
to that headset. And it may be possible that they're, and even though ultimately time is an
illusion, it could be like, we might be able to explain that illusion in terms of projections
of these headsets and so forth. So I can't rule out the possibility that our theory will eventually
take these non-precise ideas and make them mathematically precise and maybe even interesting.
So I can't rule that out. That's very fascinating. That can be quite a rabbit hole to go down through.
Do you think that, well, another thing that could lead to sort of reincarnative experiences in
general? I mean, let's say you just sort of leave that headset and maybe just enter another one
altogether. I mean, it opens up the door to sort of all those spiritual claims that let's say
Hindus or Buddhists sort of have. It kind of provides a scientific grounding for these beliefs in a sense.
That's right. It's basically, what I was saying earlier is what you're saying is basically
the one looks through the headset of an amoeba and of a virus and of a bacterium and of a Hoffman
and a Tevin and every possible headset, a cat, they're all legitimate ways of the one looking at
itself and enjoying that view and then recognizing I'm not that. I'm more than that.
And Don, how would you differentiate between something that's an avatar and something that
isn't? So like a virus, for example, we're not a lot of doctors kind of in the world. People
can't even agree whether it's life, living or dead. At what point is an avatar an avatar in this
framework, would you say? What is the minimal amount needed to be an avatar?
That's a great question because it really exposes an important concept here. And that is,
in this framework, the distinction between living and non-living is not principal.
Just as the distinction between conscious and not conscious is not a principal distinction.
The distinction that we make between living and non-living is an artifact,
entirely an artifact of the limits of our interface.
Okay. It's not principal. So I'm always interacting with living consciousness.
I'm always interacting with it. And my headset is dumbing things down because I'm not,
that's what I'm doing. I'm looking at myself to a projection. So when I see a rock,
it's fair enough within my headset to say it's not alive. It's perfectly fine. For everyday
practical purpose, I'm not going to try to eat the rock and so forth. I'm not going to worry about
the rock chasing me. And so for practical purposes, I can say it's not alive. But the
distinction is not principled. I'm always interacting, when I interact with a rock,
I'm interacting through a headset interface icon, namely the rock. I'm interacting with consciousness.
I'm not saying the rock is conscious. So there's not panpsychism of that kind. The rock is not
conscious. The rock, like the zoom pixels, right? The zoom pixels are just zoom pixels. They're
not conscious or unconscious. They're just zoom pixels. The rock is just a rock. What am I interacting
with a living consciousness? Always. So now my interface can give me more or less information
about someone else's interface with other humans. Yes. I know firsthand what a human interface is
like. So I have some idea of what it's like to be you. And then you as a doctor, if you're
dealing with patients with psychological problems, you have some insight. Whereas if you're dealing
with a mouse, you might not trust your insights from the human experience in terms of understanding
the psychology of a mouse, right? You just don't have the insight into their headset
that you have into the human headset. Well, so when I see something that I call a virus,
I have some hint in my interface of something that's like alive. But my interface is giving me
almost no information about another interface. So interfaces have information about other
interfaces that are more or less complete. And so with the rock, my knowledge of interfaces
is basically gone to zero. Okay, yes. So that's just beyond that interfaces
access at that point. That's exactly right. That's also mine. But by the way, things that
look really stupid to us, like I see some worm crawling around, it looks like it was really
stupid. Hey, for all I know, what I'm interacting with there, if I could actually if I could get
inside and understand what it was experiencing, what it might, it might, I might just want to
fall down on my knees and worship it because it's so much smarter than me and brilliant than me.
Again, what I can see about others is just due to the limitations of my own headset.
And there what they are in themselves and what they're experiencing could possibly
blow me away by if I ever. So you can see this this this point of view leads to all sorts of
radical that took me decades to even understand what what it could mean because I'm so used
to thinking inside the headset. And it's very, very mind bending. It's, it's almost like sort of
taking the blooper at some point. And like leaving reality altogether, because there's
someone as people to people who firmly love science so ingrained within it. And if someone
just has to pop in right now and just shadow and watch us, I mean, they'll think we're completely
out of it. It's completely out there. And all we'll be on all you can think is that you just
haven't taken the blue pill yet. That's right. But what's led me down this this blue pill path
is the mathematics and the science. I've been lead kicking and screaming the whole way.
I mean, but and so I understand when when anybody has an objection, I completely understand I had
that objection. And the only reason I'm saying what I'm saying is that I had to go with the science.
It's just plain the fact that our best science tells us this space time isn't fundamental.
And when you wrap your head around that space time and objects in space time are not fundamental.
That's what our best science when you that is the start of the rabbit hole and that's not
an LSD induced rabbit hole. That is a scientific based rabbit hole. And I've been chasing the
mathematics and going wherever. And that's what you have to do as a scientist, you have to be
intrepid and be willing to let go of Flat Earth, be willing to let go of Newton, be willing to
let go of Einstein, we'd be willing to let go of quantum mechanics and be willing to let go of
space time. You've got to be willing to let go of all of it and go into it. Yeah. At what point
you mentioned that the the one, I mean, you spoke about this earlier. And I think we should
have at some point get round back to that and just touch on it more because it seems like quite
some fun work that's happening at this very moment. But you mentioned that at that point,
you and Bernardo just diverge a little. What at which point exactly does it happen? Why is it
that your version of the one in this trace chain is something that would make you two guys clash
in your views? Well,
I'm not sure that we would clash too much, but I'll say where we might have some
differences. And again, you know, Bernardo's brilliant and a good friend. And if there's
something where we differ philosophically, I defer to him because he's a real philosopher,
I'm not so right. But Bernardo has recently been saying that there is a way of interpreting
integrated information theory that would be compatible with analytic idealism.
And I'll look forward to having a conversation with Bernardo about this because, you know,
he's brilliant. And so I'll probably stand corrected with what I'm about to say. But it
seems to me that that integrated information theory
does assume that there's a substrate and they're very explicit. I mean, one of their
in the four their IIT 4.0 paper. I mean, I looked and substrate is mentioned dozens and dozens of
times and not just, you know, it's not a minor thing. Substrate is is front and center.
Now, if I gave you a theory of space time, and I said, but there's a substrate
to say space time, then then I would assume from that that you're saying that space time
isn't fundamental because there's a substrate to it. Right. So if I if space time is fundamental,
then I'll just talk about space time. I don't need to talk about anything deeper than that,
no substrate to it. So if I'm talking about a theory of consciousness,
and I want to say consciousness is fundamental, well, then I don't need to really be talking
about any substrates. I mean, consciousness is the final substrate in that theory. So so this
is what I would like to talk with Bernardo about. And I'm sure I'm sure he'll have some something
that will, you know, make me think deep. But so I'm so so with all, you know, he's a good friend
and he's brilliant. So I'll be interested to do it. But my attitude right now is
a theory of consciousness that's scientific and in the spirit of analytic idealism
doesn't need any substrate for the consciousness. You just posit
the nature of that consciousness and know you don't posit any substrate. And you don't need to posit
some combinatorial properties of that substrate, like integrated information,
causal properties of that substrate that quantify how much consciousness there is.
Consciousness is consciousness. You don't quantify this. You can quantify how much
access you might have to the consciousness through a particular headset. But consciousness
itself is just consciousness. It is fundamental. And so so to so in IIT, there's always this thing
we talked about earlier that these circuits, there is no consciousness in them and these
brain circuits and these circuits, maybe they do have consciousness. The whole thing
of assigning consciousness to substrates, neural substrates in this case, is wrong headed.
It is just completely wrong. So so that's where again, I'm sure I'm going to learn a lot when
I talk with Bernardo about this. I really just learned about his views in the last couple,
three, last month or so on this. So that's why I've had a chance to really talk with him.
It also called me by storm because I'm scheduled to chat to him, I think,
in a month's time. And we spoke about a few months ago. And when we spoke, I had no idea that he
would, that I also had no clue that he would go down there either. It was quite strange to me as
well. And I'm curious and I'm keen to ask him as well. Yeah, I'm going to ask, I'll ask him as
well. And I'm sure he'll have something really good to say. And I'll try to push back on this.
You don't need a substrate and see what it says. I'll try the same. And I'll also let him, if I
speak to him first, I'll let him know without causing any sort of debate. But Bernardo loves
to debate, by the way, he prefers when when someone actively debates in a respectful manner, though.
As long as it's respectful, he loves, he loves the debate. He enjoys it. He actually told me
the last time, please actually be more, more stern and strict with the questions.
But well, I like sharp discussion in the sense that it's intellectually on point and deep.
Having it be personal, I don't, I'm not interested in having it be personal at all.
Me neither. I told him that I'm just trying to just be nice and relaxed for the podcast.
I just try and make it a nice calm environment.
But I'm Bernardo, I'll just say that he's brilliant mathematically. And I've asked him to
join us and work on the mathematical side of this. And I want to do that. I would love to get
Bernardo because he's got the mathematical chops to actually work with us on the third
conscious agents and show analytical idealism through the through the math of conscious agents.
But I mean, yeah, I mean, to get a PhD in engineering and philosophy, you must,
know your stuff. There must be something going on there that you're able to kind of bring these
two fields together and give you and give people quite a unique perspective, at least
on reality. Yeah, I think he's very busy with the essential foundation. So I see them doing
quite a lot of work lately. So probably just like you, probably a lot of on your plates
done in this virtual reality, in this reality, is there anything you want to call it, by the way?
Do you prefer calling it the virtual reality? What do you prefer calling it?
I think headset is the easiest for most people. So it's just a headset. I say that because
it's everybody can sort of relate to that. Okay, within this headset, how does this headset account
for, I mean, we know time now based on this is an illusion. But then how do we count for the
beginning, let's say, let's say the big bang within this headset. How is that conceptualized
within this framework? Well, so the time itself of the big bang is an illusion.
So what we have is a Markov dynamics in which the entropy is not increasing.
Then we say, so we have this big Markov chain, there is no time. But now let's look at it from
a perspective. Let's do a trace chain. So I talked about, we started off talking about,
so let's take a big chain. Let's do a trace chain. Well, we've lost information.
Well, so now we're going to induce an arrow of time. And it's going to look,
depending on which trace chain you use, it might look like the big bang, and then
lifeless evolution of galaxies and stars and so forth, and then life and then consciousness
might look like that. But that's the entire story is an artifact of the projection and
is not a deep insight. It's fascinating because me trying to ask you what happened
before the big bang is kind of like me asking you what happened before the one.
Is that something you're even thinking about at any point?
Well, absolutely. And by the way, I should say that what I was, the answer I just gave about
the projection and big bang just being an artifact, I actually want to actually do that.
I want to actually write down a big Markovian kernel in which the entropy is not increasing.
Choose a projection and then show, wow, when I look at it through this projection,
look at that. I do get this weird thing seem to be evolving and growing. In other words,
this is not a hand wave. I am proposing computational model. There is a Markov dynamics
beyond space time in which the entropy is not increasing. Take any projection of it
where by conditional probability, you know, like trace chains or something like that,
the entropy will be increasing. Study those. Study all the different ways that that can happen.
Our universe with the big bang will just be one of the possible kinds of ways in the universe.
So in other words, we can study cosmology from this point of view. We understand, you know,
right now, if you take space time as fundamental, then the notion of the big bang and the singularity
is an unsolvable problem. What do you do with it? But if you realize, no, no, that's just a
headset projection of a deeper thing in which there is no singularity. I've erased the singularity.
That's what this mathematics is. I've erased the singularity and showed you, you get the singularity
because of a projection, not because of the deeper, the truth of the deeper reality. So this is not,
so I don't want people to think. It might have sounded like it was just a hand wave. No, I'm
offering a technical computational program. Exactly. I mean, that's, I mean, that's the
biggest difference between a lot of other idealist theorists is that you're using computational,
I mean, you're using mathematics and physics, you know, in a very precise manner to try and
show people what you're talking about. I mean, conscious agents in the subatomic world,
you came with that very strategic knowing that this is the core layer of reality,
according to us and the way we perceive it. And that's why you guys want to touch that
base reality. And you said you don't want to go straight for the neuron because that
that is a bit, it's a lot harder. There's a lot, there's probably a lot more
that's going to have to go into that. Do you have a sort of a hierarchy of what you
think you want to go after from the subatomic world? I mean, we just mentioned going into
cosmology at some point, anything in particular that you're kind of taking these maths into at
some point, or spearheading into the future? Yes, right now, what I'm working on is a specific
technical problem, which is we've mapped a Markov dynamics into decorated permutations.
Physicists have mapped decorated permutations of positive gross monions into scattering amplitudes.
So I want to tie that whole thing together. So what I'm working on right now is interfacing
our decorated permutations with the decorated permutations and the gross monions of the
physicists. I've got to get that map absolutely precise. So and I've been working on that and I
gave two proposals to my colleagues in the last three weeks, and they're both wrong,
but they're both a piece of the puzzle. But I put them out, I thought, no, no, it's wrong.
So I'm realizing I have to dig deeper. I'm going to have to really study these positive
gross monions more deeply and write down a more serious. So that's what I'm working on right
now is because I then want to be able to, once we have that, then we can do our computational
experiment about quarks and gluons. We have to show how we can go all the way from the dynamics
of conscious agents through the decorated permutations to scattering amplitudes and properties
of particles. So that's why I'm focused on this technical issue right now. Markov decorated
permutations mapping to gross monion decorated permutations. Clean technical problem. And I'm
working on it. And I'm not a mathematician, so I'm having to learn about positive gross monions,
and I'm just learning as I go. But but I'm motivated. So that's what I'm going after now.
But then my guess is I'm a cognitive neuroscientist and I would love to be going after the brain,
but the brain is, I don't know, 10 to the 50th or 10 to the 60th quarks and gluons,
whatever. Maybe I should start with two or three quarks and gluons,
you know, and work there and then and then work up to, you know, protons and protons,
electrons or so, do the nucleus and atom and then maybe some simple molecules.
Then maybe by the time we get to molecules, maybe we'll know enough to actually know, for example,
about neurotransmitters. What does a neurotransmitter mean in terms of the
dynamics of conscious agents? But ultimately, we'll have to get then to, you know,
axons and neurons and synapses and
and you can see we have a we have to reverse. So the problem is we have to reverse engineer
a headset. So neuroscience is far harder than we thought. We thought that we look inside
through microscopes and we see billions of neurons and trillions of synapses.
And that's really complicated. And we think that that's the truth. No, no, no, that's a thin
veneer on the complex, the true complexity is far, far greater. Let me give you just a taste
of the complexity. If I have a conscious agent that has just 10 color experiences,
I'll say 50 color experiences, 50 color experiences.
You can actually, you can perceive six million or seven million different color,
you can discriminate six or seven million. So this is trivial. 50 colors is nothing
compared to what you can do. In our theory of conscious agents, the set of
possible Markov chains for consciousness is dealing with just 50 colors is the Markov polytope
on 50 states. Okay, so it's called a Markov polytope in 50 states. And this is a polytope,
it's a geometric object that we have to study to understand all the dynamics of consciousness.
And it has little vertices on it, like a diamond, it's got little points on it, right?
It's got facets and edges and points. You know how many points this, with only 50 colors,
you know how many points this geometric object has? It has 10,000 times more points than the
number of particles in the known visible universe. That's incredible. That's only for 50. So I'm
going to need a bigger computer to simulate this stuff. So consciousness, so we thought that the
brain was complicated. It's trivial compared to when we when we let go of the head to see the
headset was there to really dumb things down. And it succeeded. It really dumb things down. We
thought we were seeing truth that in all of its glory. We got the really dumb down cheap version.
As soon as we start little steps outside of our little space time headset,
holy smoke, the thing just blows wide open. Consciousness is unbelievably complicated.
And I'm going to need a new desktop computer. And I think the worst part about it is that
even as you go on, because I mean, the irony is that you'll probably need quantum computers to
try and help you prove that you can go beyond quantum, which is funny. But I think that makes
it even worse is that you have people like Mike Levin, who are even showing you that you don't
have to even go to a neuron to show people what intelligence or a possible mind even is in that
sense. I mean, he's blurring the lines completely with his work. His bioelectric fields are truly
stunning. It's amazing. His work is so brilliant. I've enjoyed talking with him. I have a couple
podcasts with Mike. And now you you're lifting this position where these bioelectric networks
also have to sort of some at some point be explained now. Absolutely. And he's leaving
you with much harder tasks, I would say. That one sounds like a little very fun task to understand
the bioelectric fields and how they would arise as an interface projection of dynamics of conscious
agent networks, right? So, so absolutely, this is, it's going to be fun to reverse engineer
our heads, our space time headset and why electric fields will be part of it, neurons will be part
of it, DNA, all all of that. So, all in some sense, science is just now taking off the headset. In
some sense, we're just now beginning the real task of science. Right now, we just polished the tools
on our little headset. We thought we were seeing the truth. No, we were just sharpening our tools.
Now it's time to take the headset off and really get to work on what's beyond.
It's pretty exciting. Yeah, it's almost like a post realism. It's a, there's going to be some
term for it. Post realism, there's going to be something where people are now moving beyond
this headset, if they're going to try and figure out reality in this way. Something, sorry.
Or maybe it'll be pro realism in the sense that we thought that the headset is not the real thing.
That's just a that's just a headset. Now we're getting into the realism. But but but even but see,
but our discussion on the limits of scientific theories means that even though I'm saying we're
going outside the headset and science is really just beginning, still, scientific theories will
never be a theory of everything. Humility is going to be required at every step because yeah,
we're stepping outside the headset. But effectively, we've just moved to a bigger
projection of the one. All we can never deal with are bigger and bigger projections of the one.
And no matter how big our projections are, they will be literally measure zero of the one.
So it is required. I'm glad you brought I'm glad you brought it back to that because I wanted
to ask you, I mean, you started off by talking about the stress chain, figuring out the one and
this new information. If you can just try and sort of conceptualize this, what you think this is
the one, what what type of is there any way for you to wrap your head around this? Do you think you
can? In a way, I think we all can in the in the following sense, if it's true that you are the one
experience itself through a headset. And the reason that you don't feel that is because
you're in with both feet on the headset, you really believe that you are the avatar in the headset.
And that's part of the whole game. I mean, the part of the whole game is to completely for the
one to completely lose itself in the headset and to slowly wake up. If I don't really believe it
for a while, it's not going to be real for me to say I'm not that because I never really took
it seriously. So I need to take it seriously and then let go. So I think it is possible
even while we're still having these avatars in the headset through meditation to let go.
But to the mind, so this is now where it starts to sort of go with what spiritual traditions
some have said, and that is that the truth can't be understood by the mind. So no words are
adequate. No scientific theory is adequate. But you have another access to that realm.
That's not a conceptual access. It's direct. You are that infinite intelligence. That's what you are.
And any concept that you have of yourself is only a projection necessarily. So the only way
to answer your question is to, of course, I do my science, but to answer your question,
to really go deep, I have to let go of all of my concepts, including all of my scientific theories
completely. No thoughts at all. So literally a space of no thoughts, no conceptions,
and just aware of aware, awareness of awareness. And then I think that's where you then
begin to know yourself, not as you know an external object, but you know yourself directly.
And my guess is that that goes infinitely deep. In other words, if you do that for five minutes,
you experienced that for five minutes, you've not scratched the surface yet. Try it for 500 years,
you've not scratched the surface yet. That's how deep you go. So that, so somehow the deep answer
to your question is on the one hand, we know the one by looking at this projection and doing all of
our science. And we know the one by doing that really, really carefully and then saying, I transcend
it. I'm not that I'm that is a lower limit on my capabilities. And I that's not that's not the
limit of who I am. Then we could go beyond that by letting go of all thoughts and just being the
awareness of awareness. And that goes infinitely deep. And so you can know it directly. But the
mind will say, because there's no concepts for the mind to deal with. So the intellectual mind
will say that's there's nothing there. But frankly, my own experience is that if I want new ideas
to do my science, I need to go into the space where I let go of all concepts, I need to actually tap
into that infinite intelligence and just be in absolute interior science. That's where all the
good ideas come from. Then you bring them back in. So so the mind really isn't I mean, it has this
all little limited intelligence and you can do you can do mathematical computations and so forth.
But if you want deep insights, you got to let go of the mind. Yeah, so we so we are one infinite
intelligence. Yes. Well, when sorry, then I'm not sure if I haven't really picked up on you
saying this much. But when did you start calling it the one?
I was into Federico Fajin. So Federico is a good friend and
really, he's a wonderful man. And he helped support this research for and he talked about
the one he didn't give a mathematical model of the one. And of course, you can't. But he talked
about the one and and I you know, at first, I didn't use the term, but then I realized that
my mathematics was pointing me toward the idea that there was going to be not just a network
of separate consciousnesses, but I was going to have to recognize that, you know, they can combine
and ultimately, there's there's some notion of one. And so I decided that that was sort of the
least tendentious word that I could use. And but I don't think right now that I have a mathematical
model of the one, I have a mathematical model of projection of the one in terms of conscious
agent networks. So so that's why I started using the term the one and maybe the last few years
after they are sort of filtered in when I started thinking more and more about the deeper
structure of this network of conscious agents. So do you think the there is so the ultimate purpose
at this point, then is the one the one sort of experiencing while having multiple experiences
via us, the avatars in this infinite sort of some essence beyond space time.
That's right. Enjoying those experiences and then learning what it is by by learning that
no matter how exotic and impressive those experiences are, they're trivial compared to
what the one is. Yeah. And then do you think done with that in mind, if you take certain
other theories that are physicalist like the malt walnut, they go a bit beyond that when they
think about a multiverse, what would a multiverse in this context to be the others? And maybe there's
one in this universe, and then there are others, you know, sort of other universes. Do you think?
Well, good. So there is, of course, a technical meaning of multiverse, you know,
that some physicists have, and also many worlds, there's different kind of technical thing there.
But one, just at a top level, one could say the idea that I have a multiple headsets could be
sort of like multiple universes, multiple multiverse kind of thing, possibly. But
when you get real technical about it, I mean, like Max Tagmark has, you know, his level four
multiverse, which he, so it's different now from what I just said, right? Because I was saying we
could think informally about all these multiverses being just different headsets, and there's an
infinite variety of them. So that's top level connection to your idea. But getting down more
to brass tacks, like what real physicists are using multiverse for, like one concrete example
is Max Tagmark at MIT, his level four multiverse, he's saying that mathematics is fundamental
reality. Okay, so the fundamental nature of reality is entirely mathematical. And there's
an infinite variety of possible mathematics. And so there's an infinite variety of mathematical
universes. And so he, and I agree that there's mathematics is endless. It's infinite. But I
don't think that mathematics, you know, of course, I think Tagmark is brilliant. And, you know,
in this realm, I would probably be set straight by him. But anyway, here's my idea as it is,
that when it comes to the nature of reality consciousness, what is the relation between
mathematics and consciousness? My feeling is that mathematics isn't the whole thing.
That the consciousness, the living, put it this way, the living organism of consciousness
has mathematics is like the bones. But the bones are just the bones, they're not the whole
living organism. And they're, they're essential. Mathematics, I think is essential, but it's not
the whole of the living organism of consciousness. So that's sort of my feeling about how my views
fit with like multiverse kinds of it. It's fascinating to me how it's becoming so poetic
over time. I mean, the more you're obviously talking about this so much more lately, and you're
trying to get people to understand it, and it's, it's starting to slowly develop its own sort of
moral practical significance as you have to hold on it and apply it. Did you ever foresee yourself
becoming someone who will sound so spiritual, almost guru like in your life? No, I mean,
it's, it's sort of, I've been pushed kicking and screaming. I can tell it was kind of thing by,
by the mathematics. And, but on the other hand, you know, at some point, it's time to quit kicking
and screaming and just say, Hey, this is what the next step in, I mean, physics is telling us
the space time is over. And quantum theory is not fundamental. So get over it, move on. And so
physicalism is dead. Okay, get over it. You know, it's time to get over it. And now on the other
hand, you might say, am I jumping in full, you know, with both feet to spiritual traditions and
just buying what they say? Absolutely not. I'm having respectful conversations. So I listen
respectfully and carefully. And I treat what I hear from spiritual traditions the way I treat
what I hear from scientists, scientists, I listen respectfully with a big grain of salt
in science and in spirituality, that there is nonsense in both realms, and there is deep wisdom
in both realms. And it's up to us to take what looks good, turn it into so spiritual traditions,
I think have a lot of insights. And there's clearly not nonsense. I mean, they're famous for
wars that kill each other for for thousands of years. So so they have deep insights, and there's
deep dysfunction. And the issue is to understand which is which, and to, and maybe for example,
and maybe that many of the spiritual traditions traditions themselves are very deeply
onto something. But the practitioners don't understand, and they're the ones that are doing
the killing, right? It's not that it's not the philosophy or it's not the insights that the
gurus have had, it's the misuse of them by the followers that that's the problem. So we have
to be very, very careful. And don't dismiss the philosophy based because some some followers
start doing some nasty things. So so there's pitfalls everywhere. So so as a scientist, what I
want to do is to listen respectfully to the ideas, then look for mathematically precise statements
of the ideas, ones that look interesting, right? And then turn them into testable theories.
Ultimately, spiritual traditions tell us that their words are just pointers, right? Like the
Tao De Ching, the very first sentence in the Tao De Ching says, the Tao that can be spoken
is not the true Tao. Once you understand that, then you can go ahead and read the rest of it
because now you understand that everything that's said is not the truth. It's not to be taken
dogmatically. It's to be taken as a pointer for you to explore for yourself. So it's not about,
so you better say it exactly this way, or you go to hell. No, no, no, no, no, these are all pointers.
Take them in the spirit of pointers, you you have to explore for yourself. So so the spiritual
traditions have said that. But wouldn't it be nice to have pointers that tell you their own limits,
right? And that's what science gives you. Space time. It's mathematically precise. And you know
what? It falls apart at 10 to the minus 33 centimeters. We can tell you where that pointer
falls apart. This is the antidote to dogmatism. So what I would love to see
is that the precision that we've gotten in science is brought over to spirituality so that we now
can have pointers in the spiritual traditions that are that are that are evolving. It's nothing
to boast about that I'm using the same pointers that they used 3000 years ago. I wouldn't brag
about that. I would say that's a problem. I mean, we would like to have this thing evolving and get
better pointers and pointers that in themselves tell you the limit, the scope of the pointer,
how it's going to be useful to you and the limit of the pointer so that we then fight over the
pointers and kill each other over the pointers. You don't believe my pointer. Well, you go to
hell or that kind of thing. I mean, this is this has been such a fascinating conversation because
I mean, it's different from the first two in the first one, we went into a lot of detail
all the theories second one, we went into a paper directly. As I said, I tried to make this one as
practical or almost a moral philosophy aspect of all of us. And I mean, you even you're brave enough
at this point clearly from all the work you've done to even mention the word the L word. I mean,
the love word in science people, you know how some scientists get when you say that.
Just talk to me about this bigger picture meaning and how people can take all this
information because now we've got two podcast episodes they can look at. They've got all the
others you mentioned as well. You speaking to Tom, you speaking to Bernardo, everything else.
How can they bring all of this information together and and fulfill this purpose of the one
or make it a more let's say a better process for all of us together?
Right. Well, I think that one way to think about what's happening with humanity is
part of humanity for thousands of years has said, this is just a headset, the spiritual part.
They said, you know, the space of time is not fundamental consciousness is fundamental,
but but but they've said that with only the tools of natural language.
They've not had mathematics. There's another group of people who have been saying, no, no,
the headsets, everything there is the physicalists, right? This is this is it.
And we're and but they develop these mathematical tools and careful experiments and
they gave us the technology. So we have one group, but then within the group that's developed
all this technology and and all the mathematical stuff. And all of a sudden, their own theories
came back just in the last couple of decades and slapped them in the face and said, wake up,
space time is just a headset. And it's a cheap headset. It falls apart at 10 to the
minus three centimeters. So so so now scientists, very few right now, but but some,
you know, I think more as we really understand the slap in the face that space time is doomed.
A lot of scientists are going to be waking up going, well, we need to.
Okay, we have to go outside of space time. It's this big group of people that are already out
there. They're saying, well, welcome, late comers. We've been here for a long time.
They've done a lot of exploring there, but they don't have the tools
that science has. So there are two groups that have half of the puzzle.
This one group has a big part of the puzzle. They've been doing meditation and they have
informal descriptions. This group is just coming late to the party, but they have incredible tools
and precision and experiments. Let's get the two together. And let's
spirituality and science are just two aspects of human exploration. It's all human exploration
and understanding who we are. They're not separate. We've assumed that they're separate.
There's been this division, especially since Galileo, you know, his house imprisonment
by the Catholic church, right? There has been this huge division. It's time for us to grow up
and bring the two halves together. It's going to be painful. Any marriage like this is going to
be painful because there's dogmas. I think the spiritual gurus don't have dogmas,
but the followers do. Many followers of spiritual traditions get tied up in the
pointer saying, that pointer is the truth. This pointer is the truth. No, no, it's just
the pointer to the moon is not the moon. The Buddhists will say it's just a pointer. It's not
the moon. But the many followers just don't get it. And that's just human nature. So it'll be
painful on both sides because scientists are going to have to let go of physicalism.
And for most scientists to let go of physicalism is to not be a scientist. But science is not
a particular theory, namely space time. It's not a theory. Science is a
method of careful experiments and careful theory building and testing and a cycle
of experiment and theory. That's what science is. Physicalism is one theory that was helpful
for several centuries and has outlived its usefulness. It's time to let go of that. And you
don't let go of science by letting go of physicalism. In fact, if you don't let go of physicalism,
then you do let go of science because you refuse to go where the science is telling
you to go. You've got to go beyond space time. So it's painful because something that we've
both sides have deeply believed will turn out to be deeply false. And other things
will turn out to be true. And we'll have to pick what are the true things or I wouldn't say true.
The next useful steps, ultimately the truth is just you without any concepts. That's just the
only truth I can talk to as you without any concepts about it. But in our efforts as human
beings to put together pointers on the spiritual side and on the science side, the two can work
together. And so that's to integrate what we've been talking about. I would say that that's the
top level picture. Let's have respectful but not credulous. So not stupid, but respectful
conversation and to find what are the good insights from both sides and what are the stupid
things from both sides and bring the good insights together and have a scientific spirituality
that's rigorous and human. Yeah, now I completely agree. I've always thought that as well. I mean
East meets West almost in Yang and Yang. You have to sort of bring these concepts together
because there's so much different types of knowledge and bodies of knowledge that
even the general Western sciences did not understand a lot of Eastern science or Asian
philosophy, African philosophy. There's a lot to it that a lot of them just have never had
access to and don't get, but found things to say. I agree with you. I agree. And I think that
in the dialogue, the informal natural language descriptions of these traditions
can be translated into mathematics. And at that point, then we can start to get the real power
of the ideas. I like to use the example of Einstein when he's developed the theory of
general relativity. The big idea came like in 1907 where he realized that if I was
in an elevator standing on a weighing scale and the cord of the elevator was cut and this went
into free-fraw, all of a sudden I would weigh nothing on the scale. I would weigh nothing.
That was his big insight that led to general relativity, but it took him years and he was
Einstein, so he was brilliant. It took him years to turn that into mathematics. But when he turned
it into mathematics, a year later or a few months later, Schwartzschild, some German soldier,
actually, but brilliant, solved his equations and proved that there were black holes. Well,
Einstein had no idea that his equations would lead to black holes. He didn't like it. He didn't
believe in black holes. So what happens is your theories become smarter than the person who wrote
them down. You become a student of your own theory, even if you're an Einstein. You're not smart enough
to know everything that your theory is going to teach you. So that's what's going to happen with
spirituality does not have that yet. They don't have the benefit of taking the ideas, making them
so precise that you can become students of those ideas where even the teacher who wrote them down
doesn't know all the implications and has to become humble before their own mathematics
and let it teach them. When spirituality gets to that point, sign me up. I'm really interested.
Well, sign me up too, Don. I'm also keen to go on that journey as well. It's been another
pleasure for me. It's been such an amazing journey. Chatting to you is always so much fun
and I still can't wait for us to have many more along the way. Anything on your mind? Anything
else you want to say? One thing I'd like to say, and that is one question that people always bring
up is you use the theory of evolution to show that we don't see the truth. We don't see
reality as it is, but then that means that evolution isn't true and so you shot yourself
in the foot. So I should address that just briefly. The idea is this. This is the way
science progresses. This is nothing special about me. This is the way you put down a scientific
theory and you make it mathematically precise. When you do that, then the mathematics tells you
what the theory can do, but it also tells you where the theory ends. Einstein's theory ends at 10 to
the minus 33 centimeters. Well, I'm not doing anything weird or special. This is just the way
science works. You take the mathematics of the theory and you ask the mathematics what's the
limit of this theory and the mathematics comes back and says, here's the limit, 10 to the minus
33 centimeters. Well, in the case of evolution, it also says the same thing. The limit is the very
assumption of space time and objects in space, organisms in space time competing for resources
in space time. That ain't true. In Einstein's case, the mathematics comes back and says,
space time, that ain't it. It's not fundamental. In fact, it falls apart at 10 to the minus 33.
You're going to need to find a structure outside of space time. Evolution is saying the same thing.
So we're not shooting ourselves in the foot. You have to understand this is the way
science progresses. The mathematics doesn't prove that the assumptions are right. The
mathematics tells you the limits of the assumptions. So it's not a minor point.
So it's how science progresses. It's almost like going back to the old way of thinking like
falsification in a sense. It's kind of you're looking for that sort of that cap, that end point,
where it does end. Well, and in fact, if you think about it, that's what scientists should
be looking for all the time is like, we know that this is not the theory of everything, right?
We know it. If I can write it down, it's not the theory of everything. So do I want to be
an idiot? Or do I want to be the explorer? So let me be the explorer. Where's the limit? So let's
find as soon as possible what the limits of this theory are and then go to the next one and then
explore its limits. That's fun. It's boring to just get stuck in the same paradigm the whole time.
And I would say one short thing too. And this question always comes up.
Alright, take your time done. I've got time. Don't worry.
Okay. I won't perseverate though. Just one last thing. A lot of people will say,
look, you're saying that the moon is just an object in my headset, and it doesn't exist
when no one looks. And you create it when you look. Give me a break. Everybody goes,
give me a break. So suppose I take, I don't know, an apple and I stick it in the ground
and leave it there for five weeks. And then you come and dig it up. You're going to find a rotten
apple. Well, doesn't that prove that the apple was there the whole time? And it existed even
when you weren't looking, right? And rot was going on when you weren't looking. And so this whole
nonsense. Well, and all I can say is if you, questions like that one, and there are many,
many, I get dozens of questions all the time. Right. In all those questions, the way to answer
it for yourself is to just put it into virtual reality. So imagine you're playing a virtual
reality game, a multiplayer virtual reality game, and try to put your question into that realm.
And then you'll see how it works. So for example, I'm playing multiplayer tennis.
And I hit the tennis ball to my partner over on the other side. And I say, you know,
the tennis ball only exists when I look. It's just pixels in my headset. And the other guy says,
oh, no, no, no. The tennis ball is real. So, and he takes, so both guys are in virtual reality.
He takes the tennis ball and he drops it and looks away. I can't see it. But Don,
can you see the tennis ball? And I say, yeah, I can see it. So that proves it really exists.
No, I just doesn't prove that I turned my head and I'm rendering it because I'm looking at it.
So it doesn't exist. Well, well, then he says, well, but when I hit the tennis ball to you,
you hit the same tennis ball back to me. So it proves that there's just one. No, no,
I have a tennis ball that I'm experiencing in my headset. You have a tennis ball that you're
experiencing your headset. So all the questions that people have before you, before you write me
an email about it. First, try it out yourself. See if you can solve the problem yourself by
putting it into virtual reality, a multiplayer game, and see if you, here's the key, here's the
key idea. There is something that exists independent of what you see in your headset.
There is something in that analogy, it's some supercomputer that's coordinating the game.
But there's no tennis ball in that supercomputer. There's nothing green or fuzzy
or round in that. So there is something that exists independent of you, but it's utterly
unlike anything that you see or experience, utterly unlike that. That's the only thing you
have to wrap. Once you wrap your head around that idea and use the VR and supercomputer analogy,
you'll be able to solve your own puzzles and then you'll see how fun this approach is. But until
then, I see people, they can't really start to explore because they just see these obvious
contradictions that they think make the whole thing a non-starter. So just put it into virtual
reality and then you can start to really explore the space. Another way to sort of see that,
well, another way I had a question on, and I forgot to ask you about that, was also when
as two perceivers are sort of seeing something, the fact that they're able to render the sort
of same thing within your theory is actually because, in essence, this is still coming from
one sort of the one. So it's not like they wouldn't have access to the same information at some
point. It's kind of like you do have this shared access to information within the reality.
That's absolutely right. It's like the supercomputer and the VR analogy is the shared access.
The one little proviso I would give is that we actually don't know that others are perceiving
the world like us. There's something called synesthesia. You know better than I do, where
people have experiences that, like Carol Steen, everything that she hears, every bit of music
that she hears, she sees a geometric object with a specific shape and a specific texture to the
surfaces and colors and so forth. And I've actually met her and talked with her in person about this.
So I mean, she's living in a world that I wouldn't have imagined was possible. She hears music
and every time she hears the same piece of music, she sees the same object doing a complicated movement
with a beautiful surface on it and so forth. Well, and there was a guy named Michael something
rather who everything he tasted with his mouth, he felt with his hands. So meant for like a tall,
cold, cool column of glass. Yeah, you get some patients who can, when they read, they can smell it
or hear sounds. It's incredible, some of the synesthesia patients. That's right. So you're
right that because we share this, the one, we can have some expectation of understanding what the
other world, what the other person's world is like. But I just want to put out this proviso that
don't think that you know everything. It may be that their world is very, very different than you
would ever. We have good experimental reasons to believe that our visual sensory worlds vary
from person to person and sometimes dramatically. I was going to say, because in that case,
someone who's schizophrenic or has fully blown psychosis has almost left that headset in a different
way. How would you sort of explore that within this? Like a fully blown psychosis where the
person is completely out of touch. There is no link at all to what you and I are experiencing
within our headsets. How is that sort of explored within this analogy? Of course, now I'm a complete
amateur. I'm not a psychiatrist or anything like that. So everyone knows this is a philosophy slash
podcast. That's not really a mental health podcast directly. Exactly. Right. So then I'll
speculate given that. So I'm not a professional psychiatrist. But it seems to me that
going back to the idea of the one and the one plunging in with both feet and losing itself.
But giving itself, we didn't talk about this, but I think the one gives itself little
nudges to wake up. And that's the suffering that happens when I get identified with myself and
I'm trying to be important. And my ego is trying to clash with other people. I'm trying to show
I'm smarter than you or better than you or faster than you or have more money or better cars.
All that competition that we do is painful. It causes suffering. The very act of me being
in any way hostile to anybody else causes me suffering. And to be competitive in any way
like that is causes me suffering. And that suffering is the wake up call to the truth,
which is that person that I'm competing against or that I'm angry with is me. That is me under a
different avatar. Now, but and I'm gently I've got the suffering as a gentle way of and sometimes
not so gentle as later on of getting me to wake up and and and to but that's part of the whole
thing of waking up to who I am. And so the psychoses I think are cases where the suffering has
gotten in many cases that sometimes it's you can say this person had a tumor and that's why I mean
really we look in there and there's a tumor, right? So that the tumor is sort of the headset
version of saying that there's something wrong in the network of conscious agents,
something went, you know, something with haywire and that the headset construction.
But in this other approach I'm thinking about is that the
the extreme psychological pain that you get with extreme psychiatric patients is really the one
using suffering of an extreme kind to wake itself up to wake that particular itself in
that avatar to wake up and to recognize that there's nothing to worry about, right? If you're in
the virtual reality game and you believe you're the avatar, if someone's shooting up the avatar,
it's scary as hell. But if you're if you go into the game, you know, my avatar is just an avatar,
you know, they can shoot up all it's a completely different game. There's no reason to be upset.
So, so that is that kind of it's waking up to Oh, this is just a VR game.
And the psychosis patient in the one I'm talking about is the one who hasn't
who's who needs to wake up but is still so identified with the avatar that they're in
they're in a world of pain and a world of fear and a world. So that's again, amateur hour from
Hoffman. I'm not a psychiatrist. Yeah, just kind of don't worry. I always put at the bottom of my
video is a disclaimer to let people know that this is more of a an educational podcast rather than a
and something you apply to your life. This is not us trying to be gurus everyone. So just
and as a doctor myself, I'm not this is not me coming out trying to give people advice either.
This is my intellectual pursuit of trying to understand these questions that I love so much.
So everyone knows that's just our disclaimer for the moment. Don, would you
have professional advice? Yes, this is not professional advice at all. Don, do you get
worried or concerned about the fact? Maybe even I don't know, do you even like it? But maybe that you
maybe Bernardo or you guys within this idealist. It's almost like a new wave of idealism that's
taking place right now. It's quite fascinating to see as well from from my perspective, doing this
podcast and taking part in these conversations. Do you ever get concerned that you guys are slowly
growing a cult or maybe that there's the people are going to take some of this and and take it way
beyond you guys like to to a point where they form their own sort of dogma type groups. Do you
does that ever concern you in any way? Well,
that's a very question I know, but I guess it does in the sense that my efforts are to make it
a mathematical science, which still doesn't preclude a cultish kind of approach, but it
really helps to avoid it when when when you don't just have words that you're pushing around.
But you have a mathematical theory that can slap you in the face when when you misinterpret it,
right? And when it actually says no to you, like when Einstein thinks that there are no black
holes and the theory comes back and slaps them and says, no, there are black holes, live with it.
So so that's so that's what I want is is a mathematically precise idealism. I call it
conscious realism because of some philosophical baggage that ideals and brings. But so I call
it conscious realism, but it's a version of idealism. I want to mathematically precise.
My goal is to get this thing launched with enough mathematical rigor and enough
momentum that it will take off and be a real science, a real mathematical idealist science.
I see idealism in the past has had something of an anti science
flair to it. I mean, Berkeley, in some sense, brought up his idealism as a reply to the
physicalism that he perceived of Newton's science. And yeah, and Berkeley had God
as part of as his main sort of core to the to the thesis. That's right. And it was sort of a
it came out of an opposition to the Newtonian science. And in many idealist theories, in fact,
I'm not really sure if I know of any like idealists who have said, let's go make this a
mathematical scientific theory. I mean, this is this is not. Yeah, there are there are some
quantum physicists who are early on who interpreted quantum mechanics in idealist ways.
Von Neumann and others give idealist interpretations. But that's not what I'm
talking about. Someone's saying, let's take idealist ideas and make a mathematically
precise scientific theory out of idealism. And you know, Kant, of course, did a lot of
deep philosophical ideas about idealism, but that's different from making
mathematically precise theories. And so there's been this anti science flavor to a lot of idealist
thinking. And and this is, it's, I think, not necessary. And in fact, it's, it's, it's not
helpful. I think that idealism is the next step. And we need to make it mathematically precise and
show that physicalism emerges as a as a headset, as a projection of a much, much deeper theory. So
by the way, we don't throw away our physicalist theories, we show them as special cases of
deeper theories. And we use our physicalist theories as tests for, you know, we're making new
theories beyond space time. How do we test them? We test them in space time. We test them like
with scattering experiments, where we know the physics of the scattering. So so we don't throw
away our old theories. We are grateful for quantum field theory and general relative, we're grateful
for evolution by natural selection. These are wonderful theories. They are going to tell us
when we make mistakes with our theories outside of space time, they will come back and slap us
in the face, because we have to protect them back into their domain. And they say, well, now
you're in our domain. And I say, no, or I say, maybe, maybe you can continue in that direction,
you're not wrong yet. So so so that's the so ultimately, I think idealism
needs to be and I'm trying to work toward that end to make it a mathematically precise
science. And then I won't have to worry about the cold thing that we talked about earlier.
The reason why I asked that is because you see it when you look at the comments and the way people
talk about your work, Bernardo, etc. I mean, the way some people are really, really in love with
it, you know, they it it is their anti anxiety cure. They listen to you guys to kind of get
the to get themselves out of tough situations. They they use this as a spiritual escape. And
I've seen comments and I like them I always tell them like, it's great. It's great that you guys
have such an impact. But at that point, you do come with a lot of power. And I recently read a
paper by someone it, I can't remember who it was by, but it was about Bernardo Kastrop's idealism
and and and I can't remember who wrote it, but it very it spoke about this. It was it was against
it, of course, but trying to dissect the fact that it's almost cult like it. It's kind of like a
group of thinkers coming together forming this new wave. It's almost like the new age atheism
movement that happened with Dawkins, Dennett back in the day, but accepting it in a shift towards
a positive sort of like love universal mind is one very, very cult like and I'm not accusing you
of this, but I'm just saying you can actually see it in the comment sections, you can tell people
do really love your work and there's a big there's a big need for it and want for it clearly.
Well, I would I would say for those who who love it.
The best thing that you can do is if you have the talents is to study the mathematics of it and
contribute to the mathematics and push it forward. Or if you don't yourself have that talent and
few of us do find a friend who does get them. The way to really to really help this is to
move the science forward. As we move the science forward, if it continues to give us
psychological comfort, fantastic. If it prods us in ways that we're not comfortable with,
so be it. We have to go wherever truth leads us or at least the projection of truth that we can
see leads us. So that's what I would suggest is is I absolutely will say my thoughts on this
are baby steps and everything that I've said your baby steps. It's in just a few years,
hopefully, even within my lifetime, everything I'm saying will be seen in this trivial compared
to what we've discovered. Let's move the science forward beyond my trivial ideas right now. Let's
get this thing into a real substantial science. And I mean, it would be crazy. I mean, the more
you guys find out, the more you see you, you could almost be seen as as the link between us and the
one. You're going to take us closer to us all together. It's just the one talking to itself.
Yeah, pretty much you're taking us closer to us. That's right. It's beautiful all together and
done. Thanks so much, man. It's always a pleasure. So much fun. Anything you want to say? Anything
else that you think that you really just want to put up? I squeezed in all the all the extras I wanted
to at this point. But next time, I'll probably have some more things that you know, I got emails
where people have questions. So next time, absolutely. I would say that I would love to
talk with you again. I'm eager and every time I'm going to try to do something different. And
obviously next time, if there's any new papers, if there's anything else you want to chat about
specifically, we go back in, do another dissection. It's always fun done. It's such a fascinating
journey for me personally. Watching from the outside, watching your work, it's always a
pleasure. And I appreciate it. Thanks so much. Thank you. And Tevin, I just love the way that
you guide the conversation. It's beyond expert. Well done.